hi this is Jared and today I'm going to
be talking about the benefits of vector
displacement maps as well as how they
can be exported from ZBrush and Mudbox
for use in Maya in this example the
image on the left has been rendered
using a vector displacement map and the
image on the right has been rendered
using a standard displacement map in
cases of undercuts in the geometry as
well as overhanging geometry the vector
displacement map does a much better job
of representing that detail
first off I'll explain the basics of
similar maps so that we can understand
the advantage of vector displacement
this is an example of a tangent space
normal map it creates the illusion of
detail by storing information about
service levels in the texture a normal
represented here by the arrow is simply
the direction perpendicular to the
polygon face this diagram shows a line
of faces with independent normal angles
for each face these angles are used in
conjunction with the angle of the light
source to calculate lighting intensity
on a given surface the orientation of
the surface does not change at all the
effect of how the light interacts with
one normal map only gives that illusion
for example a wrinkle in a normal map
isn't indenting anything
it's simply lighting the area less here
is a demonstration between normal map
and no normal map
notice with the normal map whilst the
illusion of wrinkles is created the
silhouette itself isn't changed
displacement maps such as this are
grayscale textures that use the gamma of
each pixel to represent how much a point
of a surface should be offset either up
or down along the surface normal unlike
normal maps which only affect how a
surface is lit to simulate detail
displacement maps create detail by
physically moving the surface points of
the geometry at render time here is the
previous image of the head rendered with
the normal map and the texture map only
when we look at the silhouette we see
that it's not affected by the wrinkles
however when we swap into the
displacement map render we can see the
silhouette is actually changed
vector displacement maps like this one
are relatively new features to sculpting
programs such as Mudbox and ZBrush
Mudbox has supported this since 2011 and
ZBrush sinced version for r3 whilst
regular displacement can only move a
surface point up or down along the
direction of the surface normal vector
displacement maps contain color to store
not just the height with the direction
of how a surface point is displaced this
results in a more powerful and dynamic
sort of map and allows for examples such
as here where we have overlapping
geometry as well as undercuts this is
something not at all possible with
regular displacement maps and the
difference can be seen when comparing
the difference between vector
displacement and regular displacement in
cases where there will be cuts that go
underneath the vector displacement map
in this darker background image clearly
has better accuracy of geometry compared
to the regular displacement map which is
smooth over in these sections
in summary vector displacement maps
allow for more detail to be captured
inside the map and will produce better
and more accurate results when you have
overhanging and undercutting geometry to
export vector displacement from ZBrush
go into the Z plug-in menu open up the
multi map exporter click vector
displacement and under the export
options for vector displacement you want
to turn on use tangent coordinates the
other settings can be default we do want
a 32-bit file to get the full detail and
this can come in and Excel are for
mountains rather than a tiff level one
subdiv level and set our map size and
then we create all maps simply select a
file name and save and this will export
your map to export a displacement map in
Mudbox we need to go into maps extract
texture maps new operation choose vector
displacement map and then we need to
select the low resolution mesh in our
object list add selected and then repeat
for the higher resolution mesh choose a
texture size select a file name this
will warn you that you need a certain
file extension you can say ok to that
and then simply press extract to get
this working in Maya with render man we
want to click our object and on the
shape node we want to add random and
attributes I'm going to add a subject
game a smooth scheme then on material if
we go into the inputs for that we want
to map a displacement material into this
channel load a file and select the
displacement map to this before we go
there going to change our vector space
into tangent
and then want to map our file to our vet
displacement filter type off and in a
color balance our ideal starting setting
is an alpha gain of one and an alpha
offset of minus 0.5 this is the standard
of a good place for a normal
displacement map however I've found that
with vector displacement it's often
necessary to have an alpha offset of
zero so if you're not getting good
results with 1 minus 0.5 try 1 0 in the
end for this head I actually had crank
the alpha gain up to 20 and the Alpha
offset was left on zero this does
depending on the scale of your model and
your export settings from Mudbox and
ZBrush so you can tweak these settings
to have a look at different sorts thank
you for watching I'll end on one last
demonstration wiping on the vector
displacement on top of the standard
displacement as you can see is a lot
more information vector map especially
when you up close you can notice
difference between the undercuts and the
overlapping geometry
you